---
layout: post
title:  2PL vs Strict Serializability
date:   2022-03-10
description: 2PL ensures "strict" serializability
tags: consistency, distributed-database
categories: thoughts
---



Once I thought 2PL ensures serializability while S2PL ensures strict 
serializability. However, I was wrong, as 2PL is already strong enough for 
strict serializability. 

The definition of 2PL is simple and clear. A transaction in 2PL 
is not able to grab locks once it starts to release locks. 
Consequently, the transaction's life time can be divide into 
an *expanding phase* where the transaction keeps grabbing new locks, 
and a *shrinking phase* where the transaction keeps releasing locks. 
Intuitively, between these two phases, there will be a period of 
time where the transaction is holding all its locks and conducting
its operations. 

Let's use $$H(T)$$ to represent the time period 
of transaction $$T$ holding all its locks (we do not need to 
distinguish the start/end event of this period). 

Consider two conflicting transactions $$T_1$$ and $$T_2$$. 2PL 
ensures that $$H(T_1)$$ and $$H(T_2)$$ has no overlap; because otherwise, 
during the overlapped time, $$T_1$$ and $$T_2$$ both hold the locks 
of their shared keys, breaking the semantic of locks. 

Say $$H(T_1)$$ is before $$H(T_2)$$ in real time. Then, $$T_2$$ 
must grab the locks of shared keys after $$T_1$$ releasing 
them, i.e., $$T_2$$ is serialized after $$T_1$$,  denoted by $$T_1 <_S T_2$$. 
The direct proposition 
here is that 2PL ensures serializability: if there 
is a cycle in the dependency graph $$T_1 <_S .... <_S T_1$$, 
it means that $$T_1$$ grab locks after $$T_1$$ release them, 
violating 2PL's definition. 

2PL also ensures strict serializability, which can be proved 
by contradiction. Suppose $$T_x$$ finishes before $$T_y$$ starts, 
but the serial order is $$T_y <_S ....<_S T_x$$. This means 
$$T_x$$ grabs some locks after $$T_y$$ releasing them, contradicting 
with the assumption.

Therefore, 2PL is already enough for Strict Serializability. 

TODO: S2PL